Central Control Plane and Exoscale OSB API (#122)
vshn/application-catalog-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/reference/arch-control-plane.adoc

* Managed Resource (`MR`) - Represents an external service in a Provider.
* Providers enable Crossplane to provision infrastructure on an external service. Providers create new Kubernetes APIs and map them to external APIs.

== Organization Origin

This enhances https://kb.vshn.ch/appuio-cloud/references/architecture/control-api-org.html[APPUiO Control API: Organization^] with the aspect of the origin of an organization.
The origin specifies from where an organization originates, either from VSHN or a CSP like Exoscale or cloudscale.
This origin is then used in further processes, like filtering of resources or access control.

* Organizations are marked from where they are coming from
* E.g. we put a label or annotation on the Namespace and expose this in the virtual resource under `.spec.origin`

=== Origin Metadata

An origin has a configuration which is used to parametrize further processes.
This is done in a CRD `OriginConfig`.

An `OriginConfig` contains:

* A reference to the `ProviderConfig`
* A list of available services (XRDs)
* A list of available zones

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: appcat.vshn.io/v1
kind: OriginConfig
metadata:
  name: exoscale
spec:

>   providerConfigRef:

Reviewer: Maybe an array? We might have multiple cspcps (omg) per csp

    name: exoscale-cspcp
  zones:
    - de-fra-1
    - ch-gva-2
  XRDRefs:
    - VSHNPostgreSQL
    - VSHNMariaDB
----

This configuration can be overwritten per organization namespace, for example to give access to "beta" services or additional zones.

== Service Catalog

> A service is exposed by a https://docs.crossplane.io/v1.18/concepts/composite-resource-definitions/[Crossplane Composite Resource Definitions (XRD)^].

Reviewer: We should think about having compositions as the single point of truth.

An XRD can implement multiple compositions which in turn could implement different specifics. Like another zone or even provider. That's why `kubectl get appcat` currently queries compositions and not the XRDs.

You even mention below that the true differentiation lies in the composition.

This way we can have a single generic XRD to describe any arbitrary service, including the spec for a claim.
Then the composition will just push that embedded claim to the right control plane.

Reviewer: From the discussion here more details how I think this could look (conrete names TBD):

```

apiVersion: vamp.vshn.io/v1
kind: CenrtralServiceClaim # CSC to keep the acronyms :D
metadata:
  name: serviceA #probably generated from something
  namespace: orgNamespace
spec:
  claimContent:
    apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
    kind: VSHNPostgreSQL
    metadata:
       name: serviceA
       namespace: orgNamespace
     *RESTOFCLAIM* 
  compositionRef:
    name: providerA-zoneB-serviceName.vamp.vshn.io
  writeConnectionSecretToRef:
    name: serviceA
    namespace: orgNamespace
```

The composition `providerA-zoneB-serviceName.vamp.vshn.io` will then:
* Create a kube object with the right `providerConfig` for that CSPCP
* Maybe even ensure that the org namespace exists in that CSPCP 
* Provide the connection details for that instance back on the CCP

Reviewer: Thinking even further for the future:

If we're at a point where we have even multiple CSPCPs for a signle zone in for a single CSP, we could then make the `providerA-zoneB-serviceName.vamp.vshn.io` smarter and do actual loadbalancing. E.g. it would connect to the CSPCPs via kubeclient and decide according to some criteria which CSPCP to use.

Author: > From the discussion here more details how I think this could look (conrete names TBD):
> 
> ```
> 
> apiVersion: vamp.vshn.io/v1
> kind: CenrtralServiceClaim # CSC to keep the acronyms :D
> metadata:
>   name: serviceA #probably generated from something
>   namespace: orgNamespace
> spec:
>   claimContent:
>     apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
>     kind: VSHNPostgreSQL
>     metadata:
>        name: serviceA
>        namespace: orgNamespace
>      *RESTOFCLAIM* 
>   compositionRef:
>     name: providerA-zoneB-serviceName.vamp.vshn.io
>   writeConnectionSecretToRef:
>     name: serviceA
>     namespace: orgNamespace
> ```
> 
> The composition `providerA-zoneB-serviceName.vamp.vshn.io` will then:
> 
>     * Create a kube object with the right `providerConfig` for that CSPCP
> 
>     * Maybe even ensure that the org namespace exists in that CSPCP
> 
>     * Provide the connection details for that instance back on the CCP

Doesn't that break the API compatibility? As an end-user, I want to put the same `VSHNPostgreSQL` in the CCP like I do in the CSPCP. By choosing the `compositionRef` I tell the CCP where I would like to make this service happen.

On the CSPCP the field `spec.servicelocation.serviceproviderzone` is used to choose the `spec.providerConfigRef.name` for the worker cluster where the service will be provisioned in.

In the <<Origin Metadata>> we specify a list of XRDs (e.g. `spec.XRDRefs[]`) which define the available services per CSP.
We also configure the ProviderConfig ref in the origin metadata configuration.

Access to list the available XRDs on cluster scope is denied to users of the CCP.
See <<Listing>> on how the service catalog is made available.

=== Listing

The available service catalog is subject to the organization, and specifically it's origin.
Therefore, the catalog is made available in the organization's context as a namespaced object called `catalog`.

The object `catalog` is provided by a custom API server, which provides a filtered view on the available <<Service Catalog>>.
Specifically, it's a filtered list of XRDs.
It looks up the available XRDs in the <<Origin Metadata>> in the `spec.XRDRefs[]` field.

> * TODO: Another way: Have a `catalog` XRD and a controller which reconciles these objects into the Org Namespace, this way we wouldn't need an API server

Reviewer: In favor of this 👍 API Servers with namespaced objects are a bitch.

== Service Provisioning

The CSPCP is an independent Control Plane which also could be used without the CCP.
Therefore, the CCP acts like "a user" of the CSPCP and therefore places Claims into a organization namespace.
This Claim is then reconciled into the service instance.

[mermaid]
....
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    actor EU as User
    participant CCP as Central Control Plane
    participant CSPCP as CSP Control Plane
    participant WRK as Worker Cluster / Zone

    EU->>CCP: Create Claim
    CCP->>CCP: Validate Claim
    CCP->>CSPCP: Create Claim
    CSPCP->>WRK: Create Instance
    WRK->>CSPCP: Created
    CSPCP->>CCP: Created
    CCP->>EU: Created
....

> * TODO: How are credentials synchronized from the CSPCP to the CCP for the end-user to see?

Reviewer: Either a push or a pull approach I guess. I feel like we'll need bi-directional connection between the CCP and the CSPCPs.

> * TODO: How to give end-user access to backup listing?

Reviewer: We'd have to funnel that information from the various service clusters to the CCP. I'm also thinking a controller here that would watch the `kubectl get vshn*backup` objects.

This origin is used in further processes, like filtering of resources or access control.

It's part of the `Organization` resource, in `.spec.originRef` which references a `OrganizationOriginConfig` (see <<Organization Origin Configuration>>.

.Example Organization
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: organization.appuio.io/v1
kind: Organization
metadata:
  name: acme-corp 
spec:
  displayName: Acme Corp.
  originRef: exoscale
----

.Example Organization Namespace
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: acme-corp
  labels:
    appuio.io/resource.type: organization
    vshn.io/organization-ref-name: exoscale <1>
  annotations:
    organization.appuio.io/display-name: Acme Corp.
----
<1> The value of `spec.originRef.name` from the `Organization` resource

=== Organization Origin Configuration

An organization origin is configured a resource kind called `OrganizationOriginConfig`.
This resource is referenced in the `.spec.originRef` of the `Organization` resource kind and is used to parametrize further processes.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: vamp.vshn.io/v1
kind: OrganizationOriginConfig
metadata:
  name: exoscale
spec:
  compositionSelector: <1>

>     metadata.appcat.vshn.io/serviceprovider: exoscale

Reviewer: Maybe this should be an array of `matchlabels`? Each selector will then be `OR`'d.

For example if an org has access to exoscale and cloudscale it would look something like this:
```
compositionSelector:
    - matchLabels:
         metadata.appcat.vshn.io/serviceprovider: exoscale
    - matchLabels:
         metadata.appcat.vshn.io/serviceprovider: cloudscale
```

This will then show both providers.

    metadata.appcat.vshn.io/displayname: PostgreSQL by VSHN
    metadata.appcat.vshn.io/end-user-docs-url: https://vs.hn/vshn-postgresql
    metadata.appcat.vshn.io/product-description: https://products.docs.vshn.ch/products/appcat/postgresql.html
  name: de-fra-1.exoscale.vshnpostgres.vshn.appcat.vshn.io
spec:
  compositeTypeRef:
    apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
    kind: XVSHNPostgreSQL
  mode: Pipeline
  pipeline:
  - step: patch-and-transform
    functionRef:
      name: function-patch-and-transform
    input:
      apiVersion: pt.fn.crossplane.io/v1beta1
      kind: Resources
      resources:
      - name: claim-transfer-to-ccsp
        base:
          apiVersion: kubernetes.crossplane.io/v1alpha2
          kind: Object
          spec:
            forProvider:
              manifest:
                apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
                kind: VSHNPostgreSQL
            providerConfigRef:
                name: exoscale-de-fra-1
        patches:
        - type: FromCompositeFieldPath
          fromFieldPath: "TODO" <1>
          toFieldPath: spec.forProvider.manifest
  writeConnectionSecretsToNamespace: syn-crossplane
----

> <1> We want to transfer the whole manifest - unclear as of now how to access it

Reviewer: We can copy `metadata` and `spec` as a whole in two patch operations.

Something like this:

```yaml
patches:
        - type: FromCompositeFieldPath
          fromFieldPath: spec
          toFieldPath: spec.forProvider.manifest.spec
       - type: FromCompositeFieldPath
          fromFieldPath: metadata
          toFieldPath: spec.forProvider.manifest.metadata
```

= Central Control Plane (CCP)

This page discusses the architecture of the Central Control Plane (CCP).

> * TODO: Where to store consensus to GTC?

Author: Absolutely. I removed this line as it's not needed anymore.

image::universal-control-plane.drawio.svg[]

== Summary

The Central Control Plane (CCP) provides the multi-tenant multi-service-provider aggregation and central entry-point.
All access to the Meta VSHN Application Marketplace happens through this control plane.
It offers features needed to separate organizations, control access, service provisioning and gives a central view over multi cloud providers and the instances running this way.

> We inherit the original architecture of the https://kb.vshn.ch/appuio-cloud/references/architecture/control-api.html[APPUiO Control API^] and extend it for the CCP.

Reviewer 2: Is the goal that the CCP replaces the APPUiO Control API, or will these two APIs exist in parallel?

if the goal is to have the CPP replace the APPUiO Control API, there's a bunch of open questions: e.g. how to restrict organizations which are created via e.g. Exoscale Marketplace from creating namespaces on the APPUiO zones? How to restrict APPUiO organizations from creating services on the CSP worker clusters?

Author: > Is the goal that the CCP replaces the APPUiO Control API, or will these two APIs exist in parallel?

It will replace the APPUiO Control API. Or in other words: It will advance the APPUiO Control API into a "VSHN Multi-CSP Self-Service API". In essence, APPUiO will become a product in the catalog "Namespace as a Service by VSHN aka APPUiO".

You're right, this part is missing in the docs, I need to dig a bit into what this means for APPUiO specifics today.

Reviewer 2: > In essence, APPUiO will become a product in the catalog "Namespace as a Service by VSHN aka APPUiO".

It's not clear to me that we can simply make APPUiO namespaces ("Namespace as a Service by VSHN") a product that functions the same as other marketplace services, since currently the base design of APPUiO is implemented as "make it as close to vanilla K8s as possible" and allows users to create arbitrary namespaces directly on the APPUiO zones without interacting with the control-api at all.

Author: I push this part to be detailed out a bit into the near future. For now, I focus on the Marketplace part. How we proceed (technically) with the APPUiO case will be handled in a follow-up research.

Currently, I think this will end-up similar to what you wrote: It will be handled as selective access to APPUiO clusters (zones). When access is granted, it continues to function as today.

This is done in a CRD called `OrganizationOriginConfig`.

It contains a configuration for label selectors of Compositions.
There can be more configuration if required in future features.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: vamp.vshn.io/v1
kind: OrganizationOriginConfig
metadata:
  name: exoscale
spec:
  compositionSelector: <1>
    metadata.appcat.vshn.io/serviceprovider: exoscale
  mandatoryProvidedService: "true" <2>
  defaultBillingEntityRef: "be-42" <3>
  mandatoryLegalAcceptance: "true" <4>
----
<1> Label selector to filter the available services in the organization origin
<2> Require `ProvidedService` to enable access to services
<3> An optional reference to a https://kb.vshn.ch/appuio-cloud/references/architecture/control-api-billing-entity.html[`BillingEntity`]
<4> When set to true, the Organization needs to accept the legal terms before it is allowed to use the platform. TODO via "Organization" object or via "BillingEntity"? Where should it land in the end? In VSHN Central?

When a `spec.defaultBillingEntityRef` is set, it automatically sets this value on the `Organization` object at `spec.billingEntityRef`.

> Changing the `spec.billingEntityRef` field in the `Organization` is denied, except by the reconciliation loop of `OrganizationOriginConfig`.

Author: That makes sense. I updated the document accordingly.

    apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
    kind: XVSHNPostgreSQL
  mode: Pipeline
  pipeline:
  - step: patch-and-transform
    functionRef:
      name: function-patch-and-transform
    input:
      apiVersion: pt.fn.crossplane.io/v1beta1
      kind: Resources
      resources:
      - name: claim-transfer-to-ccsp
        base:
          apiVersion: kubernetes.crossplane.io/v1alpha2
          kind: Object
          spec:
            forProvider:
              manifest:
                apiVersion: vshn.appcat.vshn.io/v1
                kind: VSHNPostgreSQL
            providerConfigRef:
                name: exoscale-de-fra-1
        patches:
        - type: FromCompositeFieldPath
          fromFieldPath: "TODO" <1>
          toFieldPath: spec.forProvider.manifest
  writeConnectionSecretsToNamespace: syn-crossplane
----
<1> We want to transfer the whole manifest - unclear as of now how to access it

As we need several combinations of Compositions where only the CSPCP connection details are different they are generated via a Project Syn Commodore Component.

=== Listing

The available service catalog is subject to the organization, and specifically it's origin configuration.

> Therefore, the catalog is made available in the organization's context as a namespaced object called `catalog`.

Reviewer 2: Given the rest of this paragraph, you probably want to use the word "resource" rather than "object" here (generally when referring to a K8s object kind, "resource" is used):

```suggestion
Therefore, the catalog is made available in the organization's context through multiple objects of a namespaced resource called `catalog`.
```

> A CRD `Catalog` is provided. Instances of this object are reconciled into the organization namespaces.

Reviewer 2: Side-note: while it makes sense in context (after trying to parse the text for 10 minutes, see comment on the previous paragraph), this CRD feels misnamed to me. Generally, I'd expect a `Catalog` resource to contain all the services that are available for a certain entity (e.g. a catalog of all Postgres services, or a catalog of all services at Exoscale de-fra-1 or even a catalog of all services that my organization has access to). However, here, a `Catalog` is metadata for a single service (e.g. VSHN Postgres at Exoscale de-fra-1).

Author: Thanks for bringing this up. You're right, Catalog is not a good name for this kind. I'm trying it with ServiceOffering now, let's see if this resonates better.

This allows to query the available services using `kubectl -n myorg get catalog`.

The catalog reconciler reads the <<Organization Origin Configuration, OrganizationOriginConfig>> for catalog configuration, according to the Organization origin found on the label of the Namespace.

[mermaid]
....
flowchart TD

>     A[Start] --> B[Get all namespaces with label<br/>appuio.io/resource.type=organization]

Reviewer 2: Rendering of this looks broken -> the label details aren't visible in `make preview`

Author: Solved by rendering as PNG instead of SVG :man_shrugging:
